Exploratory Data Analysis 
Key Visualizations and Insights 

Distribution of Houses for Sale 
Bar plots highlighted the top-performing states and cities in terms of house listings. Florida, California, and Texas emerged as the states with the largest inventories, while Houston and Chicago recorded the highest city-level concentrations. 
These observations revealed significant regional variations in housing supply, potentially driven by economic and demographic factors. 
Inserting image...Inserting image... 
Bedroom and Bathroom Distributions 
Pre-Cleaning: Histograms on a log scale revealed extreme outliers, including houses with implausibly large bedroom or bathroom counts. 
Inserting image... 
 

Post-Cleaning: The removal of upper-bound outliers resulted in a normalized distribution, with most houses containing 2-4 bedrooms and 2-3 bathrooms. 
 
These results confirmed a clustering of housing features around standard residential configurations. 
Lot Size Analysis (acre_lot) 
Pre-Imputation: Visualizations indicated a heavy concentration of smaller lot sizes, with a small subset of extreme values. 
 
Post-Imputation: Missing values were replaced with the mean, ensuring a more standardized distribution suitable for downstream analysis. 
 
 
House Size Analysis (house_size) 
Pre-Imputation: Log-scaled histograms identified a long tail of unusually large houses, likely reflecting anomalies in the data collection process. 
 
Post-Imputation: Imputation with the mean resulted in a more consistent representation of house sizes, albeit retaining a positive skew reflective of real-world housing market dynamics. 
 
Correlation Analysis 
A comprehensive correlation heatmap was generated to assess pairwise relationships among numerical features. 
Inserting image... 
Key Observations: 
A strong positive correlation (r > 0.6) was observed between house_size and price, reinforcing the hypothesis that larger homes are generally priced higher. 
Moderate positive correlations were detected between bed, bath, and house_size, reflecting logical dependencies between these variables. 
Weak correlations between acre_lot and other features indicated that lot size may be influenced by external factors such as location or zoning regulations. 
The correlation analysis was instrumental in guiding the selection of features for     subsequent modeling phases. 

Interpretation 

The systematic execution of EDA in this study facilitated a detailed understanding of the dataset's structure and quality. Key patterns, trends, and relationships were uncovered, and data irregularities such as missing values and outliers were effectively addressed. The insights gained from EDA provided a robust foundation for informed decision-making in feature selection, model development, and hypothesis testing. Additionally, the findings highlighted actionable insights into spatial and structural trends in the housing market, particularly with respect to price determinants and regional supply variations. 


Market Status Analysis 

Objective 

The real estate market is characterized by dynamic shifts, requiring accurate predictive models to classify property statuses effectively. This study aims to develop and evaluate a logistic regression model to predict property statuses, such as "for sale" or "sold," using features like the number of bedrooms, bathrooms, house size, and lot area. Additionally, we address challenges such as class imbalance using Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) and evaluate the model's performance through various metrics. 

Data Preprocessing 

Feature Encoding: The categorical variable status was encoded using LabelEncoder, resulting in a new column, status_encoded. 
Feature Selection: Predictor variables included: 
Number of bedrooms (bed) 
Number of bathrooms (bath) 
House size (house_size) 
Acre lot area (acre_lot) 
The target variable was status_encoded. 

Feature Scaling: Numerical features were standardized using StandardScaler for consistent scaling. 
Train-Test Split: The dataset was split into training (80%) and testing (20%) subsets, maintaining class balance through stratified sampling. 
Handling Class Imbalance 

To address class imbalance, the Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) was applied to the training data, generating a balanced dataset by oversampling the minority class. 

Model Training 

A Logistic Regression model with balanced class weights was trained using the resampled data. The model was configured with the following parameters: 

random_state=42 
max_iter=500 
class_weight='balanced' 
Evaluation Metrics 

Model performance was assessed using: 

Accuracy Scores: Computed for training and testing datasets. 
Classification Reports: Precision, recall, and F1-score for each class. 
Confusion Matrices: Visualized using heatmaps for both training and testing datasets. 
ROC Curve and AUC: Receiver Operating Characteristic curve plotted with AUC values. 
Results 

Accuracy 

Training Accuracy: 52.94% 
Testing Accuracy: 51.99% 
Classification Metrics 

Key Metrics (Test Data): 

Class 
Precision 
Recall 
F1-Score 
For Sale 
60% 
45% 
51% 
Sold 
46% 
62% 
53% 
The model demonstrated balanced performance between "for sale" and "sold" categories, with higher recall for the "sold" class, indicating better identification of sold properties. 

Confusion Matrices 

Training Data: 

Confusion matrix visualized with heatmaps highlighted correct and incorrect predictions for each class. 

Testing Data: 

Similar patterns were observed in the testing data, reinforcing the model's balanced, albeit moderate, performance. 

ROC Curve and AUC 

The Receiver Operating Characteristic curve achieved an AUC of 0.51, indicating room for improvement in distinguishing between classes. 

Discussion 

Insights 

Balanced Performance: The model exhibits comparable precision and recall for both classes. 
Recall for "Sold": Higher recall for the "sold" category suggests that the model effectively identifies most sold properties. 
Limitations 

Data Imbalance: Despite SMOTE, real-world imbalances could persist, influencing predictions. 
Feature Limitations: The absence of certain predictors (e.g., economic indicators or property age) might limit predictive performance. 
Model Complexity: Logistic regression’s simplicity may not capture complex interactions between features. 
